So once people come to realize this, the
whole field of cancer will begin to
change because we have defined the
mechanisms general the general mechanism
on how cancer cells are getting their
energy. And then once you target the two
fuels that are driving the disregulated
growth, which is the glucose and the
glutamine, you kill the tumor cells.
Welcome to the Baby Let's Talk podcast.
In this episode, I sat down and talked
with Thomas M. Seaf Freed who is a
professor of biology at Boston College
and received his PhD in genetics and
biochemistry from the University of
Illinois Urbana in 1976. He did his
undergraduate work at the University of
New England and holds a master's degree
in genetics from Illinois State
University. He was a post-doal fellow
and assistant professor in the neurology
department at the Yale University School
of Medicine. He presently serves on
several editorial boards including those
for nutrition and metabolism,
neurochemical research, the journal of
lipid research and ASN neuro where he is
a senior editor. Dr. Seaffrid has over
200 peer-reviewed publications and is
author of the book cancer as a metabolic
disease on the origin, management and
prevention of cancer. His book was
recently translated into Chinese and is
now under contract for translation into
Turkish. His full list of peer-reviewed
publications can be found on PubMed, and
you can find all of Dr. Seaff Freed's
links in the show notes on this episode.
Professor Seafit's work is truly
groundbreaking, and I have no doubt that
you will find this conversation very
interesting and deeply thoughtprovoking.
So, on to the podcast. Enjoy the
episode. Hi, Professor Seafrid, and
thank you so much for coming on to my
podcast. It's such an honor. Oh, thank
you very much, Ranga. It's nice to be
here.
So to begin, could you just tell me how
do you personally define health?
Oh
um well that's kind of um a broad but
very simple thing. Yeah. Uh when I when
you want to know about health, how do
you feel?
Uh you want to feel good, right?
I mean you can always ask somebody how
do you feel today? I feel great. Okay,
then you must pretty be pretty healthy,
right? Yeah, I feel pretty good. So, um
I always say that when when cuz I work
with a lot of physicians and things and
I mean when you talk to your patients,
um you can know whether they feeling
good or not. Um just by looking at them.
Uh what's their state of well-being? Uh
and generally, um if it's not good, you
got a lot of pain and you're not happy.
Uh it depends on what part of the body
you're you're suffering with. But you
know in in general um uh defining health
is just what we in in some ways we call
it metabolic homeostasis.
That means all systems in your body are
working at their intended level uh with
no uh disruptions. So um we look at the
body as a as a as a a machine. Every
part of the machine
uh working at its uh um designed uh
level uh will be associated with health.
So uh if you if if your if your knee is
damaged um it will affect the whole the
whole body in one way or another.
Inflammation and all these kinds of
things internal organs and things can be
all disrupted the the gut microbiome and
all these things. But but in general, I
think that um you know, metabolic
homeostasis is what we refer to as at
least uh uh all systems go. So Thomas,
could you introduce yourself? What do
you do and and and who are you? Oh,
well, I'm a professor here at Boston
College. I'm in my office now at the
university. Um I I'm a professor of
biology. I've been here for 40 years. I
came in 1985.
Uh before that I was uh an assistant
professor in the department of neurology
at Yale University in New Haven,
Connecticut. Um so I teach here um a
number of courses. I've taught um uh
neurobiology. I've taught
neurochemistry. I've I teach general
biology and I teach neurogenetics. and I
taught I am teaching cancer metabolism
right now cancer as a metabolic disease.
So so I have undergraduate and graduate
students and I work with a professional
staff of senior scientists and MD PhDs
and this kind. So um we we have a broad
range of interactions uh with people. H
can you take us back to how did your
journey lead you into the field of
science and medicine?
Well, um I I have a a degree in genetics
uh from Illinois State University. I was
always interested in genetics. Uh and at
that university um I got a master's
degree in uh neurospera
genetics um a bread mold and we were
looking at mutations induced by chemical
carcinogens
uh and and different environments that
would enhance or reduce mutations uh
pure oxygen environments or hypoxic
environments. published a paper on that
in the in the mutation research and then
then I went to the University of
Illinois where I got my PhD but I was
doing more mouse genetics at that time
and I became interested in glyolippids
especially ganglioides
uh and I spent um 40 years uh trying to
figure out what these molecules do. uh
we structurally characterize them. You
you might know them from certain
neurological diseases like Tay-Sax
disease and sonhof disease and these
kinds um but we were very interested in
the role in development
uh and evolution in in the structure of
ganglioytes.
Um but at the same time when I was at
Yale we were worked in an epilepsy
clinic and um we were trying to look at
at at glyolipids in the brains of
epileptic mice and humans and um uh and
and at the same time I was looking at
glyolippids in some tumor cells and we
had mouse we had developed mouse models
of tumors. Um so it was a kind of a
overlapping different kinds of of
research uh none of which had any well
with the exception of epilepsy uh would
have a clinical application
and and then we developed really good
models of epilepsy and one of my
students said why don't we try ketogenic
diets on epilepsy and Yale people
thought that was a waste of time so I
really didn't get excited about it uh
they thought drugs were the way to go
and then when I got to Boston college
you my student told me oh we have to go
and do ketogenic stuff so we started
doing that and it turned out that it was
very powerful in stopping epileptic
seizures in mice and we started the
first ketogenic diet workshop for the
American epilepsy society so I was
particip participated in in that but at
the same time we were studying um
vascularization and brain tumors and
then we realized that calorie
restriction water only fasting and this
kind of could block epileptic seizures
as well as manage
vascularization in the tumors. And
eventually it became clear that um these
tumors why why would calorie restriction
fasting stop cancer so dramatically
and then it linked us back to Otto
Warberg and then he had seen these
observations many years ago. he he he he
attributed this effect to uh a
mitochondrial disturbance
uh in cancer. Um so uh and he he said
that if the mitochondria are disturbed
uh you would have the cells would have
to use a fermentation metabolism which
is an energy without oxygen and he had
accumulated massive evidence to support
this. So when we started doing our
calorierest restricted studies on cancer
uh we were seeing the same thing Warberg
we we were able to link it to what
Warberg was saying. Uh and then I read
more and more of his papers and it
became very clear to me that he he
seemed to be correct. Um and uh it was
strange why why his work was discounted
and we started to look more into that.
um like why this German scientist who
was the most nominated for Nobel prizes
the giant in the field of biochemistry
uh why why he was so discounted and I
was seeing things that were exactly
parallel to what he was seeing and then
I I started to realize you know why
what's going on I became very very
complicated personal personality issues
holocaust issues um there were things
that were not linked directly to science
that was in part responsible
for uh the discounting of of Otto
Warberg after the Second World War.
And I felt that that was not um those
were not good reasons for why you should
discount this guy. and and then I
realized
that um he he and the field were making
assumptions
that were incorrect. Um so at first I
didn't know
uh why there was such a resistance to
Warberg besides all the other things.
But then he he he he and the entire
field were making mistakes in assuming
that oxygen consumption was a good
marker for production of energy ATP
in tissues. And um you know Warberg said
that all this the tumor tissue that he
studied had lower oxygen consumption
with higher production of lactic acid a
waste product of fermentation.
Everybody in the world knows that cancer
cells produce more fermentation waste
product. But Warberg said that was due
to inefficient
oxidative phosphorilation. But then
another group of scientists said, "Oh
no, some cancer cells, even Warberg
admitted, consume oxygen at the same
rate uh as normal cells." So if Warberg
is right, how do you account for the
fact that all these tumor cells and
normal cells are consuming oxygen at the
at the same the same rate? That means uh
Warberg may not be correct with his
mitochondrial hypothesis.
Um so we we started to look into this
more deep in detail and and Warberg was
saying that one uh mole of oxygen
consumed could produce 7 moles of ATP
and cancer cells were consuming less
oxygen than normal cells. Therefore
their capability of producing ATP
through oxygen was reduced. But then how
do you explain the fact that some cancer
cells are consuming oxygen similar to
normal cells? That would suggest that
there was something wrong with the
mitochondria.
But the field said, "Oh no, mitochondria
are perfectly healthy. Uh they just the
cancer cells choose to use fermentation,
which which is absurd. A cell does not
choose to do anything. the cell is
producing lactic acid because its
mitochondria are defective. Well, then
how come they take in oxygen? So, what
we did is we did a big study just
recently. We published this in in the
end of 2024
where we clearly showed that cancer
cells yes do consume oxygen but the
oxygen consumed by a cancer cell is not
used efficiently for ATP production.
Whereas the normal cells consume oxygen
and use the oxygen efficiently for ATP
production. So here's the great mystery,
one of the mystery solved that everybody
was making the mistake Warberg himself.
It uh you cannot equate oxygen
consumption in a cancer cell with a
certain amount of ATP through oxidative
phosphorilation. There's a disconnect.
cancer cells use some of that oxygen for
radical oxy reactive oxygen production
where the normal cell doesn't do that.
So, we solved we we solved that. But
nobody wants to believe that um
unfortunately because they've spent
hundreds and millions of dollars on an
instrument called the seahorse
instrument
uh that measures oxygen consumption over
a very short period of time using all
kinds of equations. Uh uh not not
actually looking at ATP production
directly. Um and we we're looking at ATP
production directly uh using a different
kind of a oxygen consumption machine,
the reservoir system. A and it's
inconsistent with 90% of what the world
is seeing. Um and we know that that once
and we do it over long-term days, not
just a few uh hours. So we can actually
see what's going on with these cells.
The other thing that Warberg did not
know
was that he he in the field were all
assuming that cancer cells get energy
only from the fermentation of lactic
acid using glucose as a fuel. Yes,
that's true. Uh but everybody knew
glutamine was the second fuel but they
all thought it was respired using normal
respiration procedure. We have now
discovered in a that the glutamine is
fermented uh producing uh suinic acid as
a waste product. Um this is another
major discovery that Warberg did not
know about and the scientific field uh
refuses to accept. Yet we have published
hard evidence to show that the cancer
cell can get energy from two
means of of fermentation. One is using
glucose
producing ATP in the cytoplasm
um with lactic acid as a waste product
and the second is use the amino acid
glutamine
uh through the glutamolysis pathway
which is in the mitochondria which is
called mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. So this is the the this
is what confused the field and continues
to fuse confuse them. The cancer cell
has a mitochondria and it does take up
oxygen and it does produce ATP but the
ATP is not being produced through
oxidative phosphorilation. It's being
produced through substrate level
phosphor a fermentation mechanism inside
the organel that's supposed to generate
energy through oxidative
phosphorilation. So you can see how this
would confuse everybody because they
say, "Oh, can warberg was wrong.
Mitochondria are very healthy in cancer
cells. They take in oxygen and they
produce ATP just like normal cells. They
take in oxygen. They're not using it for
ATP production and they're getting the
ATP from glutamine fermentation inside
the same organel. So once people come to
realize this, the whole field of cancer
will begin to change because we have
defined the mechanisms general the
general mechanism on how cancer cells
are getting their energy. And then once
you target the two fuels that are
driving the disregulated growth, which
is the glucose and the glutamine, you
kill the tumor cells. And if you
transition the body over to fatty acids
and ketone bodies that the normal cells
can easily si switch normal cells can
switch from glucose
uh to ketone bodies and fatty acids. The
tumor cells cannot do this. So now the
solution
a let's put it this way a non-toxic
effective approach to managing cancer
becomes clear. You must simultaneously
target the two fermentable fuels driving
disregulated cell growth while
transitioning the body over to fuels
that the tumor cell cannot use but the
normal cells can use. And you must do
this strategically
because the glutamine that's driving the
cancer cell, that same amino acid also
is important for our immune system. And
our immune system and guts use uh uh the
gut cells in our intestines uh use
glutamine. So you have to be strategic
in how how you target glutamine. If you
are too aggressive, you will harm the
immune system in the gut. And if you
don't target glutamine, you allow the
tumor cells to grow. So you have to be
able to choke the glucose production of
the tumor cell and at the same time
strategically target the glutamine u um
utilization uh uh of the tumor cell. And
once you do this then you begin to see
dramatic shrinkage and death of the
tumor uh if done correctly. uh and this
is the big paper that we just published
in in BI BMC medicine where we have uh
with many authors, MDs, nutritionists,
dietician, biochemists uh we all work
together to produce this document which
is a strategy for maning managing
glyopblastoma major brain cancer but can
also be equally used for every other
major cancer because what we have found
is that all major cancers
have the same problem. They all need
glucose and glutamine through a
fermentation mechanism and none of them
can effectively uh replace glucose and
glutamine with fatty acids or ketone
bodies. So all cancers are basically one
common disease of energy metabolism.
The gene mutations that everybody seems
to be excited about are all downstream
effects of the reactive oxygen species
coming out of the damaged mitochondria.
So for the last 70 years the field has
been chasing red herrings uh that are
effects not the cause of the
disregulated cell growth and as the
result of that we have allowed ourselves
to have cancer become a major killer of
people living in western societies uh
with with the death rate going up every
year. So, in the United States, we have
um over 618,000
people a year, which comes down to 1,700
a day or 70 people per hour. And these
poor folks are treated with therapies
that do not target glucose and glutamine
or transition the body over to
nutritional ketosis. So, they are
damaged severely. And if they do survive
the toxic treatments, they usually have
all kinds of health issues uh for
surviving uh poisonous radiations and
chemicals that were used to treat their
cancer. So you have a lot of cancer
survivors, but now they become patients
for all kinds of other therapies that
now try to fix the damage that was done
by being poisoned and irradiated. Um and
the imunotherapies that are making
billions and billions of dollars are
based on the gene theory of cancer that
cancer is a genetic disease and we have
clearly shown cancer is definitely not a
genetic disease. Um we have done
multiple experiments showing that. So
why are you treating people with
therapies that are not based on what the
nature of the problem is? And as the
result, we have this cancer epidemic
that persists and gets worse because the
field either does not want to know the
truth uh rejects the truth uh for a
variety of reasons and as a result uh
it's the patients that suffer. is the
people suffering immensely. Whe whether
you're in Iceland, do Norway, Denmark,
Sweden, United States, Japan, China,
Brazil, you can go through all the major
countries. Uh we're all poisoning and
irdiating people to try to make them
healthy. And it's not working for a
large number of people. And cancer will
is eventually going to replace heart
disease as the number one killer until
they begin to realize that it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder that
can be managed with with minimal
toxicity quite effectively and the
resistance is unbelievable. They don't
people don't want to do it. They don't
want to the the system it's the system.
Yeah. Exactly. So this is all very
fascinating and I have so many questions
for you.
What initially led you then to question
the genetic theory of cancer and start
exploring it as a metabolic disease
instead? Well, it was Warberg's work,
but then I as a geneticist, I have a PhD
in genetics and I was uh indoctrinated
to think I I never questioned the fact
that cancer was not a genetic disease.
Um I taught and I told kids that you
know, oh yeah, cancer definitely a
genetic disease. Uh and then I said when
I started doing Warberg's work uh
repeating what Warberg had done I said
wow this really is powerful um how come
nobody's doing this and then I realized
they said oh cancer is a genetic disease
and I said well if it's a genetic
disease why are we not making any
progress in managing cancer so then I
started to find paper I read the papers
by uh uh um Sonen Sheen and S Carlos
Sonen Sheen and Anosado from Cups
university and they had published major
papers showing that cancer could not be
a genetic disease. And then I started
looking at their work and they and we
found cancers that have no mutations. Um
some cancers have no mutations yet
they're growing out of control. How can
you say cancer is a genetic disease when
you have cancers that have no mutations?
How you explain that? Uh and then um
leaders leaders in the cancer field
said, "Oh, well, not all cancers have um
bad mutations. Uh they only have the bad
mutations are called drivers and the and
the and the um innocuous mutations are
called passenger mutations."
And and then I I said, "Wow, okay. Um
maybe not all all mutations are bad."
But then there were some cancers that
didn't have mutations at all. passenger
driver or anything. And I I always ask,
you know, when I went back and looked at
those papers and they were by leaders in
the field and I said, "Well, how do they
just what do they say about cancers that
have no no mutations?" And they the
answer was they said nothing. They
ignored it. Yeah. Um I said, "Why why
would you ignore something that's not
consistent with your dogmatic view?" So
So they said, "Oh, well, driver
mutations are the bad ones." So then
then I went and looked and now we have
all this new information from a variety
of labs around the world showing that
normal tissues like you look at you
young and healthy. If I did a genetic
screen on your colon or your your breast
or your or your liver, you'd find all
kinds of driver mutations in there. You
don't have cancer. Um and most they're
saying now we find that these driver
mutations that were supposed to cause
cancer are present in normal tissues
that are not cancerous. Uh how do you
explain that? And the answer is it's
unbelievable. They they they don't know
how to explain it and they say the
search for the real bad driver is not
yet complete. But I said what kind? we
found all these bad drivers and you
still don't you and you choose to
continue to hunt for something that will
never be found. Um it's just a denial
and and and then the nuclear
mitochondria transfer experiments which
I dug up from the field shows that when
you take the nucleus of a tumor cell
that full of these driver mutations and
put it in a the cytoplasm of a normal
cell you get complete growth regulation.
And if you take the nucleus from a
normal cell and put it in the cytoplasm
of a growth disregulated cancer cell,
you get disregulated growth. Clearly
saying that it's in the cytoplasm.
Clearly saying that it's the
mitochondria that are calling the shots.
It's a mitochondria metabolic disease,
not a genetic disease. So the field is
nuclearentric
thinking that all the problems of cancer
arise from within the nucleus and
therefore uh the abnormal nucleus
produces abnormal growth and and
molecules on the surface of the tumor
cell that should be targetable.
Uh and that all turns out to be mostly
untrue. Uh every now and then you get a
patient who really responds well to
imunotherapy because all of the cells
have a common signal that is targeted
but but a lot of times those
imunotherapies will destroy your kidneys
and your liver uh targeting things that
are not on the not only on the tumor
cell but also on your normal kidney and
liver. Therefore you die from hyper
progressive disease. All of this is
nonsense. All of this does not have to
happen
in our way in our world. We can take
cancer patients, shrink the tumor down
dramatically, making the rest of the
body super healthy and then if
necessary, we can come in with a small
dose of chemo, radiation, or even an
imunotherapy, but use in a very very
minor way uh as kind of a final a final
procedure to possibly knock off any
surviving tumor cells. We would never
use those as an upfront treatment
because they create more harm than good.
Um but that that comes only when you
understand the biology and biochemistry
of the disease you're working with. And
unfortunately
the field has become locked into this
dogmatic ideology. And it and it comes
down not to the science, it's to the
systems and the policies
uh that are are are uh preventing
uh uh advancements. Uh too many people
are making too much money on cancer. Um
it goes from the top to the bottom. The
hospitals are generating tremendous
revenue in treating cancer patients with
all the the drugs and the procedures.
The pharmaceutical companies are making
enormous amounts of money on failed
drugs.
uh the academic industry run by the
National Cancer Institutes throughout
the world are awarding grants to people
hunting for the neverending the the the
the mutation that's supposed to be the
one causing all this problem. That will
never happen. So everybody is making
enormous amounts of money uh careers uh
prestige on a failed uh system and the
evidence for that is that there is no
progress and dropping the death rate
significantly. The maj the major uh
progress that was made it was the
antismoking campaigns from the 1990s
uh causing and uh and they this is their
highlight film reel that we've dropped
cancer death rates by 33% over the la
since the 19 oh because of the
antismoking campaign. It wasn't because
of any new drugs. It was because people
changed their behavior and once they
change their behavior with respect to
diet and exercise, uh you're going to
see those cancer death rates drop even
more. You it's extremely difficult to
get cancer if your mitochondria remain
healthy.
And and what we're doing in every
society is we're abusing the hell out of
our mitochondria
leading to not only cancer but diabetes,
hypertension, high blood pressure, um
obesity, uh neurossychiatric problems,
dementia. All of these diseases are
linked in one way or another to
mitochondrial dysfunction. So, so once
you realize that now we have the keys to
controlling cancer and all these chronic
diseases and and we're putting out
papers and showing people how to do this
and then everybody's going to come at
some point and say, "Oh, you know, uh it
it wasn't really as complicated as we
thought. We were the ones, our own
selves were putting ourselves into these
situations and the field made enormous
amounts of money putting band-aids on a
problem uh that was intrinsic to our
mitochondrial dysfunction. And once we
realize h how to keep our mitochondria
healthy, uh we're going to significantly
reduce uh cancer deaths, uh risks, uh
all these kinds of things. And we're
working on a major paper as we speak,
bringing all this to head to to the head
and letting the world know that we have
a very clear solution to this problem uh
based on hard science, not just
speculative um um um speculation or
guesswork. It's all based on science.
So, it'll change because I don't think
people want to be unhealthy and I don't
think people want to have cancer. Uh I
think they're they get all upset when
they get the diagnosis they have cancer.
Um and we can we can put a a a big
resist a big uh control over this whole
system. The problem is um people don't
want to read the science. They don't
want to look at it. They don't want to
hear about it. Um it's too disturbing.
It's too disruptive to the status quo.
uh you've made a life career out of
something that turns out to be on a
bedrock of sand and you don't want to
hear about that. So it's human nature.
It's it's not a it's not uh it's just
who we are as a species, what we've
invested in and we don't want to say we
were wrong. So I mean that's it in a
nutshell.
Yeah. So if we go to the basics like
explaining the foundations of the
metabolic theory of cancer for our
listeners who have or may not have heard
of this idea that cancer is a metabolic
disease. Can you explain what that
really means in quite simple terms?
Yeah. Well, we published the our biggest
paper that just came out on the warberg
hypothesis and the emergent emergence of
the mitochondrial metabolic theory of
cancer. Um theories are a way to explain
the facts of nature. Uh and and you have
a theory that tries to explain a
phenomenon. Uh and you continue to
collect data uh to better explain the
phenomenon. What we have found is that
the mitochondrial metabolic theory can
explain the phenomenon better than can
this somatic mutation genetic theory.
But then what does that mean in terms of
how you get cancer? uh uh how does it
all start and this kind of thing. Um
that was it was called the encogenetic
paradox.
It was a um a statement made by Albert
St. Gorgi from uh Hungary uh who
received a Nobel Prize for his work on
vitamin C. But he he was the one who
identified this phenomenon of the
ankcoenic paradox. He said
uh he said it there's so many things
that seem to be linked to cancer but we
have never found the common
pathophysiological
connection between these provocative
agents and disregulated cell growth
which is cancer. He said well people
smoke they could get cancer.
Intermittent hypoxia can cause cancer.
ankcogenic viruses like papilloma virus,
hepatitis C virus. We know that you can
get cancer from these viral infections,
um, chronic inflammation. As people age,
they seem to be more susceptible to
cancer. And he was saying, you know
what, we can't figure out what the
common pathophysiological mechanism is
for this paradox. uh uh like almost
anything can cause cancer and yet we
don't know the common linkage and even
in the book the emperor of all malades
by Sid Mukerji
uh which was a best-selling book uh on
New York Times uh he even wrestled what
is the common pathophysiological
mechanism why this per why this woman
uh gets breast cancer she smoked another
woman gets breast cancer she never
smoked
Some woman who has a BA one mutation
gets cancer. Another woman who has the
BA mutation doesn't get cancer. Um what
what how can you explain all this? Well,
we've clearly explained it. All all of
these things are chronic disruptors of
energy metabolism in the mitochondria.
So uh mitochondria become damaged
uh chronically
uh by all of these different provocative
things. So a woman might get breast
cancer because she has an occlusion of a
milk duct leading to a focal
inflammatory site and that inflammation
damages the ability of the mitochondria
in a particular cell in the inflammatory
region to become uh inefficient.
uh leading to a compensatory shift to a
fermentation metabolism
uh which would then be necessary for
that cell to survive. But because of
that shift uh the organel that
mitochondria
uh regulate the quscent differentiated
state of a cell and um if the cell needs
to divide it's the mitochondria that
controls the cell cycle
and and uh if the cell is damaged too
acutely it is the mitochondria that
elicits a programmed cell death
mechanism to kill the cell. But if the
mitochondria become chronically uh
disrupted, the death signal doesn't take
place because the switch to the
fermentation makes the kill switch no
longer working. So that cell bypasses a
natural death, it should die, but it
doesn't. And then once the or the the
organel controlling the destiny of the
cell loses control of the cell. So the
cell falls back on an ancient pathway of
fermentation that all cells used before
oxygen came into the atmosphere 2 and a
half billion years ago. So these cancer
cells are falling back on an ancient
pathway of energy where there was no
growth regulation, no growth control
because the mitochondria did not exist
at that time. So that milked occlusion
could lead to a disregulated cell growth
uh in that another woman may have a BA1
mutation uh which also uh damages the
ability of the mitochondria to produce
energy. Um the BA1 it's it's a protein
produced by a particular gene but the
way it causes cancer is disrupting
mitochondrial function.
So again, you could either have a milked
duct occlusion, you could have a
obesity, systemic inflammation, you
could have a a germline mutation. Um,
uh, you you could be older, you all of
these things will elicit a chronic
disruption of mitochondrial function
coupled to a transition to substrate
level phosphorilation, which is
fermentation, and disregulated cell
growth. And what's interesting is that
if the mitochondria are damaged too
acutely, the death signal turns on and
the cell is dead. So you can never get a
a cancer cell from a dead cell. So but
that cancers bypass the death signal
because they have shifted to an
alternative energy which is a
fermentation. Now what's interesting is
that um
ankco genes which you hear a lot about
they are facilitators
of transitioning the cell from
respiration to fermentation.
So Hif 1 alpha which is anko gene opens
the floodgates to bring in large amounts
of glucose and glutamine into the cell
to drive the fermentation mechanism. And
if I put a new mitochondria into the
cell, uh, uh, Hif1 alpha turns off. You
don't, you don't need large amounts of
glucose and glutamine because the cell
is back to respiration again, which is
highly efficient because you got a new
M. It's like putting a new engine in a
car. Um, so you don't need to have a
large amount of of of this fermentation
fuel. And then if you damage, now here's
the the best example of this. As a
physician, you should know that when a
person has a heart attack, cardio
seizing of the heart, um they their body
fills up with lactic acid very quickly
and suxenic acid very quickly. So if you
look at the bloodstream of a person
who's just had a heart attack, he's no
longer breathing uh but he's not dead uh
unless he stops breathing for 5 to seven
minutes or however long. And what
happens is the neurons
can only switch to a fermentation
metabolism for about five or six minutes
depending on what kind of shape you're
in. And and then your neurons die and
you're dead because your brain is dead.
Uh but in that interim period both the
heart and the brain and other organs are
immediately switching to a massive
fermentation mechanism.
And the waste products of that are
lactic acid and suxinic acid which are
the waste products of glucose and
glutamine fermentation in the
bloodstream. Now when you that heart
starts beating again, you give you know
cardiac uh
excitement. You what do they call it? P
pump on the chest blow to the guy. All
of a sudden he starts breathing again
and the lactic acid and suinic acid
disappear from the bloodstream uh
because he's breathing and he doesn't
need to do use fermentation. Now here's
the difference. That's a heart attack.
An acute disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation leading to a short-term
compensatory fermentation
seen by the buildup of lactic acid and
suinic acid in the bloodstream.
Um the cancer cells are continuing to
dump lactic acid and suinic acid even in
the presence of 100% oxygen. What that
says is that their mitochondria are
permanently damaged. Their mitochondria
are no longer capable of producing
sufficient energy and that's the reason
why they continue to ferment. That's the
difference between a heart attack which
is an acute utilization of fermentation
and when oxygen comes back it
disappears. But the cancer is a chronic
disruption of oxidative phosphorilation
leading to a chronic production of
lactic acid and suinic acid which are
the waste products of glucose and
glutamine fermentation.
So to kill cancer cells, you must take
away their glucose and glutamine and
they will die. That's their kill switch.
They can't switch to any other fuels.
It's not that complicated. And let's put
it this way. It's not as complicated a
problem as people made it out to be in
the first place. We have a clear
strategy for doing that. We now know how
to kill cancer cells without toxicity
because and they can't switch to ketone
bodies and fatty acids. So because they
need oxygen and a good mitochondria to
burn fatty acids and ketone bodies and
all major cancers accumulate fatty acids
as lipid droplets in the cytoplasm which
is a marker telling us they can't
respire. So they build the fatty ac
they're telling us they're telling us
exactly what's wrong with them. For
decades, they've been telling us what's
been wrong with them. And we, as a
superiorly educated species, ignored the
information that the cancer cells have
been telling us what to do to manage the
disease because we have thought that
they were just a genetic disease and
therefore the signs that the tumor cells
were telling us were ignored. This is
how we Yeah, it's unbelievable. All
right. And I I just find this so
fascinating because of this uh with the
lipid droplets. You know, it's been
thought that the cancer cells are
accumulating fatty acids in lipid
droplets in their cytoplasm because they
need as like a fuel stores uh storage to
to produce energy, right? But that's not
the case, isn't it? No, it's a because
if they try to burn the fatty acids,
they'll create reactive oxygen, a
greater amount of ROSS, which will kill
the cell. So the cell is storing the
fatty acid because it can't burn them
and if it tried to burn them it would
die. So it's a kind of a protective
mechanism against death uh to store the
fatty acids. So and and to prove that uh
what we do is we grow cells in the
presence of or absence of glucose and
glutamine in the presence of uh these
so-called fatty acids or ketone bodies
and they they die. So so you they can't
burn them. uh if you take now people say
now what is very interesting though is
that if you have uh fatty acids in the
presence of glucose and glutamine the
fatty acids can in fact uh force a
greater fermentation mechanism. So uh as
long as you have the two fermentable
fuels there fatty acids will make the
fuel the fermentation fuels be better
used. So, um, and then people say, "Oh,
look at look at if I give them fatty
acids, the cancer grows even faster."
Yeah, but you didn't take away the
glucose and glutamine. Take away the
glucose and glutamine, the cell will
die. So, the fatty acids are making or
increasing fermentation of glucose and
glutamine that are still there. You
never took away the fermentable fuels to
see whether fatty acids alone could
drive the disregulated cell growth. And
the answer is they can't. And we tested
all this. So, so, um, clearly we know
what we're talking about because we have
the scientific evidence to support what
I'm saying. We interrogate these tumor
cells. This is what we do. So, we we're
the only ones who do this. I don't know
why everybody, they all seem to be
looking at gene signaling pathways or
some downstream stuff. You know, the
easiest way to determine this is we take
the cancer cells and we put them in
saline, which is just salt solution, and
you know, they go in there and they die.
There's nothing for them to eat. So, you
take a stopwatch uh and see how many
hours it takes for these cells to all
croak dead. And then you um say, "Oh,
wow. This is interesting. They're all
dead. Why? Well, they got nothing to
eat. There's no fuel. There's nothing.
It's just salt water, right? And what
are you going to live on salt water? I
mean, these cells have to have something
to grow, right? They're going to grow on
air and water. War and air ain't going
to make them grow. Where are they going
to get the energy to make new membranes?
Where are they going to get the fuel for
new membranes, new DNA, new proteins?
There's nothing there but salt and
water. And they die. Then we add stuff
back one at a time and see what keeps
them alive. And wow, you know, you start
throwing a little sugar in there and all
of a sudden they perk up and they start
uh making lactic acid and but then they
die because they don't have any protein
to make uh they don't have any nitrogen
to make protein or nucleic acid. You
need nitrogen. Where you get your
nitrogen from? Glutamine. Glutamine is a
beautiful source of nitrogen. Well,
there's a lot of amino acids that have
nitrogen. Why don't maybe the tumor
cells can switch to these other amino
acids. So we put all the different ones
in there and yes there there are some
like glutamate they can do a little bit
but the problem is then you have a
logistic issue which is the supply of
the material in the environment. If you
have a cell that's very inefficient in
utilization of energy you have to make
sure you have enough fuel in large
quantities uh to replace the efficiency.
So the the issue of course in tumor
micro environment there's very little
other amino acids. Glutamine is the
major amino acid in the bloodstream in
our body. Uh and all the other amino
acids are there but they're not in
quantities that would be sufficient to
drive a disregulated cell growth for a
very long period of time. So you use up
any of those. And besides all the other
amino acids must invest energy uh to get
energy. So it's kind of a um a cycle.
You're investing energy to get energy,
but the overall is you're not getting
anymore. Glutamine is you you don't have
to invest any energy in glutamine. So
it's pure gold for the cell and it's
given the nitrogen. So not only do you
get energy through mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation, but you
also have the nitrogen that allows us to
synthesize DNA and proteins. And the
glucose carbons are good for fatty acids
and and they're good for uh a large a
large number of other uh metabolite
metabolites needed for growth. So those
two fuels provide everything that the
cancer cell needs to rapidly grow. And
you know people say, "Oh yeah, well how
are they doing this? Are you sure
they're not using uh uh oxidative
phosphorilation?" So I said, "Well,
let's test test that." So, you know, you
know as a physician that if people want
to die quick, you drink cyanide. Um,
take a solution of cyanide and Kool-Aid
and you drink the Kool-Aid with the
cyanide and you die. Why? because
cyanide blocks um the cytochrome C part
of the electron transport chain uh
completely stopping the ability of
oxygen uh to drive from to drive
respiration and you die and it's a kind
of a a permanent thing. Um well, we take
our cancer cells and we give them
cyanide and it doesn't do anything. They
don't die from cyanide. Uh uh wow. Yeah,
because they're fermenting. They don't
need oxidative phosphorilation and you
can grow them in the absence of oxygen.
They grow fine. So that that's telling
us they're not using oxidative
phosphorilation. They've switched to a
fermentation mechanism. Oh well, what
are they fermenting? Well, we
interrogated them. They're fermenting
glucose and glutamine. They we tested
everything else. There's the only
things. Do you think it would work in
people? Uh yeah, it really works well in
people when you
to kill cancer cells without toxicity.
Why why is nobody doing this? Because
they think it's a genetic disease. Yeah.
They're chasing genes and and and people
are dying needlessly as the result of
this misunderstanding of what the nature
of the problem is. So when you take
people and you target simultaneously
glucose and glutamine while they're in
nutritional ketosis,
uh you have allowed that person to live
longer. Uh a progressionfree improvement
and overall survival improvement
uh is greatly uh enhanced uh by just
switching the fuels that the tumor cell
uh needs for for those that it can't
use.
So, so, uh, and it works and it works
really, really well. Well, why is nobody
doing this? Uh, well, they think it's a
genetic disease. Uh, therefore, this
what I'm tell and if you go to most
oncologists, eat whatever you want. Canc
they they there's no cancer cells can
use all kinds of fuels, not just glucose
and glutamine. Oh, yeah. Did you I did
the experiments. I tested that.
Why don't you read what we published and
see what where did we make our mistake?
I even have a cash reward. Please,
somebody, we'll give you a $100. And we
told my do, I'll give you a thousand. My
one of my um Dr. Dur will he'll give you
a thousand bucks if you can find any
fuel that the tumor cell can use other
than glutamine. Nobody's taking us up on
this. Nobody's coming to us and saying,
"I have the evidence." And then when
they say they have the evidence, we look
and they said, "No, you still have some
glucose and glutamine in there. You got
to get rid of the glucose and
glutamine." And then he says,
"Everything dies then. You can't study
something." What? Yeah. I said that's
the exact that's the point. That's the
point.
But how Thomas, how does chronic
disruption of energy production
particularly through impaired oxidative
phosphorilation lead to the disregulated
cell growth that you see in cancer?
Yeah. Well, that's the great that's the
great question because um people need to
think about that on two levels. One
level is through evolutionary biology
and uh and the second level is the role
of mitochondria in c in controlling the
cyclones and the cell cycle. So it turns
out that um the mitochondria like for
example when you have liver regener you
can take a a lobe of someone's liver and
take it off and the liver regenerates
really well and it uses respiration. You
know, at first it ferments. They get
lipid droplets. When you first damage
the liver, you've disrupted
vascularization
and you see a switch to a temporary
fermentation
with lipid droplets in the cytoplasm.
And then as the mitochondria regain
their control, the lipid droplets
disappear and the liver cells start to
grow very rapidly. They can out they can
grow faster than a tumor cell.
Regenerating liver cells, but they're
using respiration. Yes, they use glucose
and glutamine, but it's at a mo much
much lower level uh than the tumor cell
would use it. Like if I take a hepatoma
from the liver, which is a liver cancer
as uh uh it uses glucose and glutamine
in large amounts producing lactic acid
and suinic acid. Whereas the
regenerating liver cells grow very
rapidly, but they're not producing
lactic acid or suinic acid. clearly
telling us they're they're growing very
rapidly by oxidative phosphorilation
mechanism not a fermentation mechanism.
So when mitochondria become damaged in a
cancer cell
uh they control calcium signaling in in
the cell the mitochondria through the
proton mode of gradient it's now getting
a little bit deeper into the science uh
have a way to regulate calcium
signaling. Calcium is a very powerful
signaling molecule in the cell and the
calcium fluxes control the cyclones that
control the cell cycle. So when you lose
calcium signaling fluxes, the cell will
go into a default state of
proliferation. Um and that's the default
energy state is of cells is is
proliferation and the default state of
all cells is proliferation. The default
energy state is fermentation. So when
you go back evolutionarily like Albert
Seni showed uh during the alpha period
of life on earth we had single-sellled
organisms that were living on our planet
uh before oxygen came into the
atmosphere and these cells were in a
constant state of fermentation but there
was no growth regulation. They would
grow as long as they had fermentable
fuels in the environment and then they
would die. um only when the fusion
between archoacteria
and another cell uh this led to the
formation of mitochondria and led to the
metaans which are multisellular
organisms. So cells could have a
division of labor within the cell
leading to more and more sophistication
which is life as we know it today. uh
but in the early beginnings of life uh
when no oxygen was available cells were
growing like crazy uh in a disregulated
way and would die as soon as the
fermentable fuels in the environment
were dissipated. And this is the same
strategy we're using to manage cancer.
cancer cells are are defaulted to a
proliferative state because the organel
controlling uh the cell cycle is no
longer capable of doing that and they're
falling back on a fermentation mechanism
driven by glucose and glutamine. So, so
clearly uh once you pack in the
knowledge of evolutionary biology with
the role of the mitochondria in
regulation of the differentiated state
uh uh or regulated growth um regulated
growth not disregulated growth because
the organel controlling regulated growth
is abnormal which then leads to
disregulated growth and a fermentation
mechanism. So we put all the parts of
the the puzzle together and now we know
how to manage cancer effectively based
on our understanding of evolutionary
biology and default states of metaone
cells. So, so um and to test the
hypothesis
you we had pre-clinical studies. That's
how we did all this. We did it in mouse
models of cancer and then and then uh we
tr we tested it in humans and we're
seeing more and more humans uh whether
they have glyobblasto advanced breast
cancer or whatever uh living far longer
because we're we're we're tapping into
the the the weak spot of the whole
cancer cell. We know what to do, you
know. Is it perfected? No, it's not
perfected. um any any more than when the
Wright brothers first flew their plane.
Now within a hundred years you got jet
planes. Once we once the field knows how
to perfect the system, cancer will not
be a feared disease. It'll be just some
inconvenience that you have to deal with
for a while uh until you can bring your
body back into a state of metabolic
homeostasis which will kill the tumor
cells without toxicity while the rest of
your body gets healthy. Now that's a
personal choice. If people don't want to
do that, then we're not stopping anybody
from being super saturated with
poisonous chemicals or radiation. If
they want that, it'll always be there
available. And we're still not getting
rid of that because we know that if we
can shrink the tumor down to a small
residual mass, it may be possible to
cure that individual with radiation and
chemo, but in a very different dosage
and and and approach to this strategy,
timing dosage. So, we will take all of
what we have available and just
reconfigure the treatment strategies and
get much much better outcome um for for
patients. So so yeah so that's um and
all the major cancers have have have the
same problem. So it is the mitochondria
that control the destiny of ourselves
and the destiny of our life. We we die
um if you live long enough nobody lives
forever. Uh we have a termination in our
life. uh that termination can come
earlier or later depending upon the the
state of your mitochondrial health. If
your mitochondria are healthy uh you
generally live longer than if your
mitochondria are unhealthy and that's
comes down to the second law of
thermodynamics which is entropy which is
disorder. Just by living on the planet
long enough, your mitochondria develop a
lot of wear and tear and ultimately we
do die from old age from uh um systems
failure. It's kind of like uh none of
the all of the mitochondria just at at
the same time give up. You you you just
can't maintain you can't you can no
longer fight equilibrium. Equilibrium is
death. where you no longer can keep the
energy needed to to transport ions on
either side of the membrane. And that
and that's another thing. Um we're alive
because we are are are away from
entropy. Entropy is where the the
concentration of of ions are equal on
both sides of the membrane. And we stay
alive. We stay alive because of pumps uh
these membrane pumps that require a lot
of energy. So the energy pumps the pumps
push sodium out of the cell potassium
into the cell and you have an electric
gradient across the membrane of cells in
our body whether it's a neuron, liver
cell, colon cell, breast cell, whatever.
When those pumps run out of energy, you
get systems failure and you die um
because you run out of energy. And why
some people run out of energy earlier
than others? Well, their mitochondria
are not as strong as other people. And
some people die from you die from
cancer, you die from heart disease, you
die from all these different kinds of
things. But you know, you have hundred-y
old people and and and and these guys
that are alive one day and dead the next
um because they've had an entropic
systems failure because they just ran
out of energy, can't live, can't live
forever. But their quality of life was
pretty good up until the day they die.
Um even the Queen of England, she was in
uh shaking hands with some person one
day and the next day she's dead. like
what happened? Well, she was older and
she her her she just ran out of energy.
Uh which is what happens. But but you
know when we abuse our bodies with lack
of exercise, poor sleep, emotional
stress, all this kind of stuff, we put
we put damage on our mitochondria and we
tend to not live as long uh as as
others. And you can see, you know,
you're young, I'm older. You know, just
by living on the planet, you you you
accumulate reactive oxygen species and
your skin changes, your organs change,
and stuff moves in different ways and
eventually you run out of energy, you
die. But, you know, if you have
exercise, you try to do what you do, you
live, you can live longer. Um, but
cancer is like accelerated aging because
the because the the mitochondria are no
longer in control and you're going to
reach entropy a lot faster. Accelerated
entropy. So, um, yeah, we can put all
this together in a in a global
physiological evolutionary biology
context and and we can explain the
majority of this. And it's interesting
too when you do metabolic therapy like
we've seen for some cancer patients um
who also have diabetes, obesity, uh and
all kinds of other health issues that
they were all being treated with pills.
Uh as their cancer disappears, so does
hypertension, diabetes, all other things
go away
along with the cancer. It's
unbelievable. Yeah. But it's all related
to mitochondrial health. That's all it
is. Mitochondrial health. Exactly. Now
when it comes to metabolic therapies,
you know, some people assume that
different types of cancers are
fundamentally different diseases, and
you touched on this a little bit
earlier. Do you think the metabolic
approach applies to, you know, broadly
across most cancers, or are there some
exceptions to that? We haven't found any
exceptions. That's why we that's why we
published that big paper. I had to spend
a year going through this the literature
looking for evidence that mitochondria
are damaged in all major cancers. So we
I don't know maybe there is a cancer out
there that has normal mitochondrial
function but we haven't found it yet. Um
and every major cancer that we find has
some abnormality in the mitochondria
number structure or function and they
all accumulate lipid drops. uh and and
again so that's why I say over and over
again cancer is one disease all the
tumors regardless of where they come in
the body all accumulate lipid drops and
have abnormalities in the number
structure and function of mitochondria
can't burn lipids uh a and are dependent
on glucose and glutamine. So some
cancers are more dependent on glutamine
than glucose. Others are glucose and
glutamine but together. And then that's
how we found metastatic cancer
uh which is a fusion hybridization
between the immune cell and a and a
cancer stem cell because the immune
cells in attempts to put out wounds
cancer has been recognized as an
unhealed wound. So our immune system
macrofagages and certain uh kinds of
luccoytes come into the cancer
environment and they throw growth
factors and cytoines to try to put out
or um um heal the wound but that's done
in that should not be done in that
context and then they fuse with these
cancer cells. Now immune cells like
macrofages are genetically programmed to
enter and exit the bloodstream can move
through tissues and this kind of thing.
So when they become corrupted, that is
the origin of the metastatic cell. It's
a mac corrupted macroofage. So we spent
years trying to figure out what the
origin of the metastatic cancer cell was
and we found out that it was a
macroofage. It took us 10 years to
figure that out. Um um because then we
said, well, what about human? And then
we went and looked at all major human
cancers and they all manufacture markers
of macrofasages. So then the first thing
we ask the the the new scomes out of
Oxford and England had been studying
energy metabolism and macrofages for
decades and and what they found is that
glutamine is a predominant fuel for
cells of our immune system and
macrofasages in general. So what what
happens what happens is like in burn
cancer patients when the skin gets
burned uh you open the body to staff and
strep bacterial infections because the
skin is a protector of against bacteria
and when you have a burn patient you
give them highdose glutamine. uh you
give them highdose glutamine because it
it jacks up the immune system to kill
the bacteria that's coming in in droves
because your skin is now so you the burn
cancer patient if not if their immune
system is not jacked up they're going to
die from infections indirect from the
burn. So, so what happens is you got to
keep your immune system as powerful as
possible and they're and you use they
use glutamine like there's no tomorrow
and that glutamine is what the
macroofage is using but the same fuel is
also driving the the metastatic cancer
cell which is a macroofage. So that's
why we developed the press pulse
therapeutic strategy for managing cancer
because we know that the tumor cell
that's going to kill us and the immune
cell that's going to save us are both
using the same fuel. So you really have
to be strategic now. So it's good
glucose is a nonnec necessary nutrient.
So you can push glucose levels really
down really really far, but you have to
be strategic in how you target the
glutamine because if you're too
aggressive um you you you you might
impair the immune system. You might not
kill all the tumor cells, but you've
blocked the very cells that you need to
kill to pick up the dead corpses. So
again, it's a balance and that's why you
the the physician must know how to
strategically apply glutamine targeting
while the patient is in a state of of
nutritional ketosis because that's the
dosage. This is why I'm saying we have
not yet perfected the system. We just we
just are need to improve dosage timing
and scheduling with the various
glutamine targeting drugs while the
patient is in systemic nutritional
ketosis. uh cutting. So we cut the
glucose off and now we strategically
target the glutamine, but we want our
immune system to be able to come in and
pick up the dead corpses. Otherwise, we
get internal infection. So again, again,
it's knowing how to play the different
systems of the biology of our systems
against each other and awful. How do you
how do you do that? Sorry. um with the
glutamine the press pulse um method do
you like restrict glutamine for some
period of time and then you introduce it
again or how does this work? Yeah. Yeah.
That's it. That's it. So that's what
we're trying to work out. Right. This is
nonsexy science. People love the fun.
It's true. It's everybody wants oh
what's the molecular mechanism? You know
what's the gene? I don't care that. What
I care about is is how can we keep the
individual, whether it's a mouse or a
human, alive in a high quality of life
for as long as possible. And and we know
that if we're too aggressive in
targeting glutamine, we not only
paralyze our immune system, uh we also
damage our gut. The gut needs so much
glutamine. So you do a job on the
microbiome and you cause all kinds of
other problems. So you really want to
keep the whole systems of our bi of our
biology working at optimal levels while
deg slowly degrading this tumor. Um see
the system today is you got to burn and
poison these people get rid of the tumor
as quickly as possible but you're
harming so many other systems in the
body at the same time. We take a totally
different approach to this. We gradually
destroy the tumor slowly and surely
while the rest of the body slowly and
surely gets healthier and healthier. So
it's not like uh because when you've
done standard of care to people uh and
you oh yeah you're going to clean that
we don't see any more scans cleans clean
and and and but but your body is so beat
up but then if the tumor comes back your
body is already so damaged from all the
poison and radiation you can't use your
normal cells as effectively to kill the
tumor cells because because to kill
cancer you need not only the
intervention that we're talking about
you need the health and vitality of the
normal cells in the body that work
against the tumor um because they can
get by with using ketones and fatty
acids where the tumor cells can't. So so
and the and the brain and exercise
becomes an extremely important uh tool
because the the muscles will suck up the
glucose out of the bloodstream where the
tumors absolutely need it. The muscles
will take it from the tumor, the brain
will suck up what's little left. what's
left for the tumor, almost nothing. And
then you come in with the the glutamine
targeting and polish off these things,
but you do it strategically so you don't
damage your gut or impair your immune
system. So, it's beautiful system. It's
got it's so elegant. And I just get
excited talking about it's just going to
be so magnificent when it's used to
perfection. We need people like you that
will perfect this. The you're you're the
kind of people that will perfect all
this. We're the ones providing the
science for what you you should do. you
know, I find it's so fascinating. Uh,
Professor Seaf, it's like, but one thing
that's kind of uh that I'm thinking a
lot about these days is that, you know,
we're talking a lot about glucose and
elevated blood glucose levels in your
opinion or Yeah. Are elevated blood
glucose levels the biggest driver of
cancer or is it more nuanced than that?
Well, I think the elevated glucose
levels
uh uh will lead to systemic
inflammations and things like this. Um,
you know, we always have to go back to
see how we evolved as a species. Um, you
know, we're we're a species for about
1.5 million years, which is nothing
compared to the previous history of life
on Earth. But for for several hundred
thousand years, we were hunter
gatherers. Uh, how high was our blood
glucose levels trying to run down a
buffalo or some sort of an animal, an
elephant, and kill it? Um, and then you
eat it and what are you eating? You're
eating fat and and and and and and
meat. Um, where where are you getting
your glucose from? How how can you have
very high blood sugar levels? You're
going to be super insulin sensitive. um
where where are your sugars coming from
uh when when you're eating meat and fat
and uh like you don't have
pizza pies inside of an elephant. I
mean, where are you getting your sugar
from for hundreds of thousands of years
and you're exercising like crazy? So
your blood sugar is always going to be
in in the 55 to 75 80 milligram per dec
or or 3 to 4 millmer level. You're
you're never going to be diabetic. Where
the hell are you going to get diabetes
from? Um you know who's going to be a di
unless you have a type 1. That's that
could happen in paleolithic times. Um
but most of the time cancer,
hypertension, all these different
diseases was unknown. How do you know?
Because we have people on the planet
today that live according to their
traditional ways and they don't have
cancer, they don't have diabetes, they
don't have obesity, they don't have high
blood sugar levels. So high blood sugar
consistently high blood sugar is an
example of a of a metabolic inh
homeostasis. You're not in metabolic
homeostasis any longer and you put your
body at risk for damaging mitochondria.
And the mitochondrial damage leads to
these chronic diseases. Uh whether it's
diabetes, whether it's hypertension,
whether it's cancer, whether it's
cardiovascular disease or dementia. This
is another example of of chronic disease
damage to mitochondria. So, so clearly
uh uh high blood sugar is the
consequence of inactivity and
consumption of highly processed
carbohydrates, which is the global
western phenomenon that's striking the
entire planet. And that's going to
account for that. Our Paleolithic
ancestors never had that situation. Now,
did they want to be in that situation?
The answer is no. They wanted sweets.
Um, but they couldn't get it because it
wasn't available. Not that they didn't
want it. We we developed it. You have to
realize that in the 1800s, sugar was in
very limited supply and people who had
sugar often had to keep it in lock and
key because it was such a desire. It was
almost like a drug. It's like cocaine or
something. Um, now we've mass-roduced.
So, sugar uh in almost every kind of a
food we eat is riddled with sugar. Uh,
and we're getting diabetes and we're
getting fat and we're getting demented
and we're getting cancer. We're getting
all that. That never happened in our
paleolithic ancest. We're still
paleolithic man today living in a an
environment that we've always wanted,
but there's a Pandora's box in that
environment.
called cancer, dementia, type 2
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, all of
the chronic diseases are the Pandora's
box that we have strived for in our
entire uh existence as a species and now
it's coming back to give us all these
problems. Um but but if you know that
then you at least have the choice to
manage it and be aware of it. Uh and
that's the individual thing. Yeah. One
thing that I'm thinking is, you know,
regarding healthy mitochondria or
mitochondrial damage, we have
indigenously living populations who have
a high carbohydrate diet, eating mostly
sweet potatoes, for example, that don't
get cancer in the same degree as we do.
So could you do you maybe believe that
we can maintain mitochondrial
health long term while still including
healthy carbohydrate sources like fruit,
honey, milk, sweet potatoes, stuff like
that? I think so. Must be in ketosis to
protect our mitochondria and inhibit
cancer development. Well, I think
ketosis was how we we are a ketoic. We
we evolved to be in ketosis. And when
you burn ketone bodies, you have to
realize how powerful they are in keeping
mitochondria healthy. Um, every breath
of air we take in, we produce a certain
amount of ATP. But if we're if we're in
ketosis, we get more efficient energy
with each breath. The uh um the oxygen
uh is much more efficient in producing
the ATP when you're when you're burning
ketones. It's a very interesting
bioenergetic
uh efficiency. Uh you get more ATP per
mole of ketone than per mole of of
pyuvate from glucose and fatty acids
uncouple. So that dissipates some of the
energy. So it's not nearly a ketone.
they call it a super fuel uh for
maintaining not only reducing oxygen
radicals in the mitochondria which
damage us over the time but also the
energy efficiency that we get. So so
clearly that state is healthy for our
mitochondria.
Can we do it by eating sweet potatoes
and this kind of thing? Well, those are
natural carbs. They're not high what we
call high glycemic carbohydrates.
uh they're clearly not going to be as
damaging to the mitochondria as say
highly processed carbs. The other thing
too is if you are active uh if if you
have a lot of exercise um you can
certainly mitigate some of the uh
elevations of blood sugar and again how
many sweet potato I mean what are you
what are you going to do gorge yourself
on on these things? Um it it it it uh it
was a balance when you think of how we
evolved. It was, yes, we ate sweet
potatoes. We We ate tubers, but you had
to boil them. You're not going to eat
them raw. We ate, listen, as a species,
think about who we were. We ate
everything. You know, anything that
would swim, crawl, fly, we ate it. Um,
we never were people who say, "I'm a
vegan." That's that's a luxury of modern
lifestyle. You would you were a vegan in
the old days, you would have been
extinct. you know, you just you would
never die. We could be dead. We try to
try to maint try to track down an
elephant when you've just been eating
vegetables. You know, it's not going to
be it's hard to kill those things. And
the energy that would be expended and
even even if the Inowits in the in the
Arctic Circle eating walruses and seals
and fish and all that stuff, they
weren't eating vegetables in very any
quantity. Only seasonal stuff they would
get it and then they would store it in
like fish oil and stuff. So you're
you're always getting uh highly
nutritious foods. Um so uh so again,
yes, there are some but the people that
we see living according to their
traditional ways usually have some meat
source in there. They're they're never
without some sort of meat. Uh I don't
know any any tribe that eats no meat,
you know, uh except modern-day vegans.
and they have to take vitamin
supplements otherwise they're going to
have all kinds of imbalances, you know,
and why would anybody want to do that to
their body anyway? I mean, you want to
stay healthy, right? So, yeah. Well,
exactly. I can just speak for myself.
I've done that and it was out of pure,
you know, I thought this was this is
what I was hearing that was healthy and
I tried it for several years and I've
never been as sick uh my entire life.
So, well, that's the point. You know,
why would anyone want to do that to
themselves when you can eat a tomahawk
ribeye? Talk to Anthony. You know,
Anthony Chaffy, right? You know him
Anthony? Oh, yeah. He was there at the
meeting. He lo He eats massive amounts
of ri tomahawk ribe eyes every day.
Yeah.
And look at him. Did he look unhealthy
to you? I don't think so. Exactly. He's
like, you know, he's the, you know, the
statue of health, I would say.
Him and Dominic the Augustino. both of
those guys, you know. Dom eats all that
stuff, too. So, so, uh, and Anony's wife
looked pretty healthy, too. She didn't
look like she was a weak one, you know.
Yeah. I met her at the at the meeting in
London, and, you know, they they look
very healthy, and, you know, I had a
chat with her, and she's they're lovely,
and, you know, it's like Yeah.
Yeah.
I'm not saying just don't eat eat only
meat. Uh, you know, I think we we can
certainly have high a sweet great uh
yams uh these kinds of things. But you
know what we do? Uh we take that sweet
potato and we put a lot of brown sugar
on it and and
some and some uh you know uh sweet
sauces and all kinds of stuff to make it
even better than it is. Um but that's
usually for holidays and things. You
don't do that every day, you know. Uh
but you know it's just our desire for
for sugar and sweet. We evolved to be
loving that and now we have an abundance
of it and it's killing us. So um but I I
I try to you know I listen I'm not I I
eat pizza pie. I eat pastries and stuff
but I but I don't eat it every day you
know. But I like we enjoy things. That's
what we like to do, you know. Yeah.
And I and I I like to say it's not so
much about what we eat between Christmas
and New Year's. It's about what we eat
between New Year's and Christmas that
matters. So yeah. Yeah. No, that's true.
You know, and have a lot of exercise,
but I know today in big cities, uh
you're under a lot of stress. Um you
you're you don't have you're sitting in
cars with traffic jams. You you have you
run home to children that are crying,
yelling. They want something fast.
You're not going to go out in the
backyard, chop the head off a chicken,
pluck it, and then have it for dinner.
Uh it's much easier to throw something
in the microwave that's probably
processed in some form. And and it's
hard. And then the kids today and young
people today are on these cell phones
and and they're getting all freaked out
about what someone said about them on on
some chat room. And that puts a lot of
emotional stress, which raises
gluccocorticoids in your body, which
makes unnatural elevations of sugar.
poor sleep at night. Uh you know, you
can go through the whole stress,
emotional stress, and all this kind of
stuff. And you put that together and and
you got a lot of cancer, dementia,
cardiovascular disease, obesity,
diabetes, insulin insensitivity. Go
right down the list. It's very it's very
clear what's going on. It's just our
modern day society is putting us at risk
uh for this. So, and there was a a paper
that just came out of ASCO, the big uh
cancer pharmaceutical industry meetings
where a Canadian physician, it's how
powerful it is for people, people
believe in physicians that whatever they
say is like God's word. Uh in most cases
it is, but not in the cancer field. But
but the the uh physician who wrote out
prescriptions for the cancer patient,
take the chemo, but every day you have
to walk so many miles, you have to lift
so much weights, you have to do this to
do that. And the other person getting
the same chemo, but the guy the doctor
told him just do exercise without
specifying.
the the person the p the patients that
got the prescription from the doctor to
run this much and walk this much and
lift this much they did much better. So
clearly if the patient follows the
prescription that the physician gives
them uh they will do better and and
adherence to any effective therapy will
always produce a better outcome than
nonadherence.
So if the doctors would know how to
integrate present standards of care uh
with exercise
and nutrition, I think the outcomes for
the cancer patients will be infinitely
better. Uh uh so the future is bright as
far as I can see. It's definitely not
a abysmal like most people make it out
to be. Um, so, so we have the strategy.
We know what to do. We know how to do
it. We just got to get the field to to
recognize this and let them move forward
with it. But again, the biggest block is
revenue generation. Um, and don't forget
the cancer field is revenue generation
first, patient outcome second. Uh, and I
I know I I know I say that, but it's
true. uh we can't use our therapy right
now in any way because it doesn't
generate enough revenue for the system.
And that's the truth. You want to know
what the dark side is? You can't
generate revenue from this. Therefore,
it's not going to be widely accepted
until an entrepreneur can figure out how
this can be replacing revenue
generation. Then once that happens,
you're going to see it become
widespread.
Yeah. So that's one thing I've been
thinking about a lot because you've been
dedicating
decades to this work. How has the
response from the scientific and medical
communities evolved over time? Do you
feel like the door is starting to open
or is there still strong resistance?
Well, I think the door is certainly
starting to open. The word is getting
out. You know, we were the first ones to
bring this to the attention. I mean,
Warberg had it for sure, but they threw
him under the bus. Um when I published
my book in 2012
uh on this it started the kind of uh
serious discussion uh we had published a
few several papers before that in
scientific journals um for the
scientists based on preclinical studies
and things like this. But again there's
a lot of discussion within the
scientific community because they use
oxygen consumption as a measure for
oxidative phosphorilation which then and
they they still haven't come around to
realize mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. Um so so there's some
resistance in the scientific community
and there always has to be and I
appreciate that. Um but as far as the
industry is concerned, the hospitals and
the pharmaceuticals and and this kind
they they have they have yet to to uh to
to um recognize it as a legitimate uh
approach because but their arguments for
against it are not scientific. They're
they're systematic. I I don't believe it
unless there's a clinical trial. Um
well, that's not a scientific argument.
We we we have a lot of case reports and
small clinical groups and massive
amounts of preclinical data um to show
that it scientifically it's what you
should be doing. Oh, well, I don't
believe it unless I And you know, that's
a thing because when I when I
was working with the epilepsy people,
they wouldn't believe ketogenic diet uh
for managing epileptic seizures until
you bit did a big trial and then we did
a big tri my colleagues, not me, my my
colleagues did a big trial proving
unambiguously that ketogenic diet is a
powerful therapy for managing seizures
in children, epilepsy. So, we had the
evidence, but the pharmaceutical
companies in the field refused. they
still want drugs first and then if the
drugs don't work we can do that but so
that's argument do a clinical no it's
not has nothing to do with that it has
to do with revenue generation show me
how I can make money on ketogenic
metabolic therapy and I'll do that when
you when I can't replace my money from
radiation and chemo I'm not going to do
that so clearly it's revenue generation
so h do the cancer patients know that do
the cancer patients know that their
disease is driving a major industry and
that they if they if they they have an
alternative. Why the do why the
physicians aren't saying we have an
alternative? I you can't believe how
many physicians are emailing me when
they have cancer. They want to do
metabolic therapy. They don't want to do
radiation and chemo. So, uh and they and
the ones the physicians who support me
the most are those that are retired. Um
not the ones that are actively part
practicing. The ones that are retired
are telling me, "Oh god, I know you're
right. I I've known this. I just
couldn't say anything about it." they're
retired. Yeah.
So, so that's what you're up against.
You're up against this system. Uh, and
I'm telling you, once you get these
young young physicians involved, like
our new new um society um society for
metabolic oncology, you should be a
member of that yourself. It's a it's an
international society uh from all
physicians, nutritionists, physicians,
scientists around the world, all major
countries uh wanting to jump on this
bandwagon to improve uh outcome because
those who are doing it are starting to
see dramatic success. But but they they
fear losing their license because
they're doing it, you know. Um that's
why, you know, they can't abandon
standards of care for fear of losing
their license. But they they what the
IRBs, institutional review boards say,
you must do standard of care first and
if it doesn't work then you can consider
metabolic therapy. No, no, no, no, no.
You do metabolic therapy first and if it
doesn't work then you can do standard of
care. Uh no, no, no. We can't do that
because we're going to lose too much
money. Suppose metabolic therapy works
and we don't have to use drugs and
radiation. My god, we're going to lose
so much money. This is what irritates
me. It infuriates me that you know these
I I understand this financial incentive
but how about you know by keeping people
alive and healthy they can contribute to
the economy of their society and their
country by staying you know on the
market and in in you know working
you know the big picture why can't we
just look at this from a financially big
picture and it well yeah but that's the
purest of view
It's it's more it's more profitable to
keep people sick than healthy.
Yeah. Soundly
and and we and and and you know it's not
like we're forcing people to be sick. Um
but the food industry is making it so
attractive to be sick. Um and the
pharmaceutical industries and food
industries collaborate in different
ways. So you get sick eating bad food
and they come in with the pills and the
and the medications to try to make you
healthy. Uh so it's extremely profitable
uh societies here and it drives
economies too. Um you know your your
people are making bigger money, they get
bigger taxes and you can buy all kinds
of stuff and and and what he's telling
me, "Oh, don't eat the Twinkie. I love
Twinkies." The guy says, you know what
he's telling me? Yeah. Well, the
Twinkie, you eat enough of them, it'll
kill you. You know, it's like poison.
Yeah. Right. So, so what I'm see I'm not
proposing to anybody that they should or
should not eat whatever they want to
eat. All I'm doing is showing you the
science. I'll let everybody come to
their own. That's why we developed the
glucose ketone index calculator which is
this a quantitative tool to allow every
person to know at any moment of the day
what stage of health uh uh their body is
in by looking at the ratio of glucose to
ketones. So um you know I if you're
insulin insensitive and your blood sugar
is high and you've got a lot of
inflammation your your GKI is going to
be very high. If you are a paleolithic
man like Anthony and Dominic Di
Augustino, you're going to be in the low
zones uh where where GKIS are going to
be 2.0 or below. And that's where the
zone you want to kill cancer cells in.
Cancer cells can't survive or have a
difficult time surviving in those low
zones. But but you can the person can
make a decision for themselves. Uh, and
we're going to work on on making that a
standard. Once you have
glucose, continuous glucose monitors,
continuous ketone monitors, we're going
to be able to know at any moment of our
daily life, uh, how you stand with
respect to metabolic homeostasis and and
then let every person on the planet make
their own decision as to what state of
metabolic homeostasis they would like to
be in. But it's no longer going to be
guesswork. You have a quantitative tool
to tell you where you're going to be. No
longer guesswork. Oh, I've been on a
ketogenic diet for a long time. I don't
feel that good. What's your GKI? Well,
it's still pretty high. Well, you're not
doing it right. You got to know what to
do and how to do it. The physician and
the patient will work together as a
team. And a lot of this can be done
through Zooms or or or computers. AI can
help. All of this stuff will help. But
it's the individual that will be totally
responsible for their destiny uh with
the help of a physician. And I think
right now we're at the very very
beginning of this transition to knowing
what to do and how to do it. And I think
we'll worry about uh unanticipated
consequences once we get the people back
into a state of health um and then see
what happens. And of course there's
always something you never anticipated
happening. uh but but right now I think
that the the world is suffering from
chronic disease all kinds of chronic
diseases um uh uh their metabolic
homeostasis is is not adjusted
appropriately. They're not they're in
metabolic in homeostasis. So why don't
we correct that and then and then worry
about other things later. So what we
have today is is so many physicians at
least top um academic scientists are so
interested in molecular mechanisms of
action. I I say let's let's manage the
problem first and then worry about the
molecular mechanisms of action. Why are
we studying mechanisms for something
that's not linked to a phenomenon? uh
why are we letting all these poor cancer
patients die a miserable death when
you're trying to figure out a molecular
mechanism of action that may may not be
linked directly to the phenomenon that
you're working with. Let's manage the
phenomenon first and then figure out the
the minutia of it. Um rather than doing
the minutia that may not be linked to
the problem that you're trying to study.
So so all of it has to be done in the
right order to get the best outcome. Um,
and that's what we're trying to tell
people. And the patients themselves must
be educated. You must have some level of
scientific literacy. Uh, both the
physicians and the patients must become
scientifically literate. For a physician
to say to a patient that glucose has no
no impact on cancer. Eat whatever you
want. Don't worry about it. This is
misinformation.
That person does not know the the the
the information about the problem that
they're that they're treating. That
should not happen. Why did that happen?
Because in medical schools, these people
were never trained to know what we're
talking about. And they then do advanced
training, the internship, and they they
never study. They just learn the dosage
of what toxic drug they're supposed to
give, not knowing that that toxic drug
could work 10 times better if the
patient is in nutritional ketosis. So
that all has to be worked out. So um so
there's a lot of levels at which we have
to address a lot of issues that we have
to address before what I'm talking about
becomes mainstream. Um it will become
main it's just a matter of time you will
see it mainstream. I I I don't know if
I'll live long enough to see it
mainstream but you I hope I will live to
I hope it will happen very soon and that
it will you know happen in my in my
time. I really hope well if it doesn't
happen in your time then then it ain't
going to happen.
I'm counting on you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
We'll continue. You're going to carry
the burden for me. Yeah. Right. Exactly.
Well, I tell I tell my students if they
don't do what I if they don't push this
thing forward and when they and it and
it doesn't happen, I'll come back from
the grave and I will haunt them.
Yeah, that's a good that's a good way to
threat. It's a good one. But can I ask
you Thomas regarding the food industry,
what is your view on dietary seed oils
and the long-standing recommendation to
avoid saturated fats in favor of
unsaturated fats from vegetable oils?
Could this have contributed to our
current metabolic disease landscape or
Well, it might be another provocative um
provocative agent thrown into damaged
mitochondria. Um don't forget um
saturated fats are what we what the
liver uses to make ketone bodies. So we
mobilize fat out of our atapost sites
when we don't eat and they go into the
bloodstream. You can see the blood we
did it uh that goes up in saturated
fatty triglycerides uh and they go into
the liver and get broken down into
water- soluble ketone bodies. Um we give
MCT oil uh as a kick kicker uh during
water only fasting or this you can do
some MCT oil which jacks up your ketones
a little bit more. So uh polyunsaturated
fatty acids are fish oils omega omega-3
fatty acids extremely healthy for you.
Uh omega6 less healthy. Um so again it's
the ratio of these and the amount that
you take into your body. So everything
has to be uh adjusted accordingly uh to
natural ways. No, I I don't think an
oversaturation of of anything uh that
would be provocative to creating an um a
disruption in metabolic homeostasis
should be seriously uh avoided. Um but I
but I don't think avoiding uh yeah maybe
some seed oils would certainly be uh
damaging to the mitochondria. You would
want to avoid that, you know, uh, cook
things in butter for crying out loud.
You have everything in butter tastes
better.
Why would you want to cook, you know?
So,
but what's your perspective on the
common belief that meat causes cancer?
You know, there are some theories that
certain compounds formed when cooking
meat may be carcinogenic. How do you
interpret this? Have you looked into
this?
You know, I don't see any Why would that
Well, look at Dominic and uh Anthony.
They don't look like they're so on.
That's all they eat is meat. I don't
know what's going on with those guys.
Why would it be so these guys look like
Adonis for Christ? They look like David
in in down in the Rome statue there, you
know.
I I don't know what those what kind of
meat those guys are eating, you know. Um
but I have to agree with you in some
ways because a lot of the meats can be
uh hormonally jacked. Uh you give you
give these cows all kinds of hormones
and stuff. Uh but naturally listen
plains Indians here in the country they
were they'd ate buffalo every day. I
mean uh we ate exterminated woolly
mammoths. We ate so many of them. Um you
know uh so so I don't see any harm in
eating meat if it's more natural
grass-fed natural stuff. Um maybe maybe
some hormonally prepared hamburgers. I I
I don't know. But meat meat is is any
food that's natural should not be
avoided. I I don't know where the health
problems come in. Mhm. Yeah. But can I
ask you one question? Um
how do we explain cancer in young
children who seemingly haven't had the
time to accumulate the metabolic dam
metabolic damage that we associate with
cancer? Could it be linked to like in
utero exposures or early life metabolic
insults? Why, you know, why do young two
three year olds get cancer? Well, they
get cancer for the same reason that the
rest of us get cancer. They have
mitochondrial disruption. Mitochondria,
every every childhood tumor tumor we
look at, they're fermenting. So, how did
that happen? Uh, obviously, there was
some damage to the mitochondria and a
population of cells during the
development. I mean, some kids have
cancer before they're born. There's
prenatal kinds of cancers that then it
becomes more more prominent when they're
born. So, neonatal cancers, all these
cancers, they're all fermenttors. How
did it happen? Was it a hormonal
imbalance during the developmental
period? We have microplastics and
forever chemicals pouring into our
systems from all different sources that
can be p that could get through the
blood placental barrier. Um we have
anastmoses of blood vessels that cause
in uh uh interrupted oxygenation of
certain tissues. Um but whatever it is
when you see the the childhood tumor
they're fermenttors which means they
have a common origin to cancer in
adults. It's just that we don't know uh
the sequence of provocative events that
that may have initiated that. So again
in those particular situations
uh we may we may we just have to know
how to manage the cancer once the the
tumor is identified and which is tragic
because because I see so many little
kids with brain tumors being brutalized
surgically hacked apart and radiated and
poisoned uh and even if they survived
their brain damaged in many cases. Uh
why are we doing that to these little
kids uh when we can give them metabolic
therapy uh using and we have the
parasite medications which target the
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. We have everything that
we need to keep these kids alive for
longer. We're not using it. We're simply
not using the tools that we have. So I
don't know how we're going to prevent
childhood cancer because it's we know
it's something that would provoke
mitochondrial damage. But what is it? Is
it something that the woman themselves
the the the is she obese? Is she abusing
her body in some way that now translates
into the child? Is it a healthy very
healthy woman who just happened to have
uh um forever exposure to forever
chemical in in some food that she didn't
know about? Um I don't know. But all I
know is that the initiation is the same.
It causes mitochondrial damage followed
by a compensatory substrate level
phosphorilation. So there therefore we
have to our strategy should be in the
management zone rather than the
prevention zone. When you're an adult
and you know what can cause cancer, you
have the choice to prevent it. But in in
uterero or a child doesn't have that
choice. Mhm. Yeah. And that's the thing
we're seeing now younger seemingly
healthy individuals develop cancer at an
increasing rate. What is driving this
trend in your opinion? Is it Well, I
don't I don't know how healthy they are.
If they were really healthy, they
wouldn't be cancer in the first place. I
mean, we have an obesity worldwide
obesity epidemic. Uh we have more and
more highly processed carbs entering our
diet everywhere. Uh food has become
globalized. You know, it used to be
people would just grow what they had in
the backyard and eat it. It was quite
healthy. Um now you're getting something
in a package, you don't know where the
hell it came from. um you know the the
fresh fruits can live on the as I said
they can they can look good for weeks uh
what are they talking about something
that's really really nutritious should
be bad in about 2 days on the shelf you
eat it as soon as it's ripe and fresh um
so we have engineered a lot of our foods
uh to survive longer but at the same
time we're reducing nutritional value of
those foods so so again all of these
things are impacting and and I think
it's the globalization of our societies
that are putting us at risk for earlier
and earlier chronic diseases, not just
cancer. You can look at di type 2
diabetes is becoming more and more
prevalent in younger folks.
Hypertension, uh all kinds of um chronic
problems. So cancer is just one of the
chronic problems that people see. Oh,
why are these young people getting so
much? I can't tell you how many people
in their tw uh 20s, early 30s, or 40s
emailing me, oh, I've got this cancer, I
got that cancer. What am I supposed to
do? You know, and I'm saying, what the
hell is going on with all these? What
are you people doing out there? You got
to get a lot of exercise. You got to do,
you got to start realizing, keep your
mitochondria healthy. If your
mitochondria healthy, it's going to be
very hard to get cancer. You must have
done something to damage your
mitochondria. Well, I I run every day
and I do this and I do that. But you may
be under a lot of stress. Maybe you
can't sleep at night. Maybe you have
other There's a constellation
of a of factors. It's not one factor.
It's usually a a constellation of
factors that come together. You have to
know those factors and address them.
Okay? You know, they are on the
pelletrons all day long, but then
they're uh sitting in front of a
computer all day and you don't know.
This is not who we were as a species.
This is not hunting down an elk,
spending all day long trying to kill and
and cut this thing up. We most of our
life was doing that. It wasn't sitting
in front of computers or being exposed
to forever forever chemicals, stress,
and all this other kind of stuff that we
have in modern society. Yeah. What would
need to happen for the cancer community
to truly reconsider its foundations, do
you think?
Well, I say I think when you have enough
cancer patients that are alive that
should be dead. I love the guys that are
told, "I got one month to live. Uh, what
am I going to do?" And here they are
four and five years out. Why are you
still here? What's they you were
supposed to have a terminal cancer. Why
are you not dead? And and some people
live with their tumors like Pablo Kelly.
He lived 10 years with a glyopblastoma
only to die from a uh the fourth
surgical debulking a cerebral hemorrhage
that came as the result of the surgery
but not from the cancer. But was he
cured? No. But he lived many many years
longer than he was predicted to live. Uh
we we're still perfecting the system.
What's wrong with that? What's wrong
with keeping people alive longer with a
higher quality of life, overall
increased survival? What's wrong with
that? Everybody say, "Oh, you have to
have the cure." Listen, who can
guarantee a cure on anything? The the
the the issue here is how long can you
live with something that was supposed to
kill you and you're still alive? And if
and if you can live five or six times
longer, then that's success. Uh I don't
know if metabolic therapy can cure. The
only thing we definitely cured was a dog
that had a terminal mass cell tumor. Uh
and that we published it in a paper. The
woman took the dog and took them off all
the processed food and put them on raw
chicken and um raw raw fish and oil and
raw eggs and cut the calories down. The
dog died from old age. The cancer
disappeared very quickly and the dog
died of old age. So it never cancer
never came back. But the veterary
community said, "Oh, we can never do
that because you're not supposed to feed
dogs raw meat." And and I'm saying,
"What the hell? The dog evolved it from
a wolf. What do you think? The wolves
were not eating raw chickens and eggs
and stuff like that. What the hell were
they eating? Kibbles and bits. You know,
they're they're not eating what
processed dog food. Where are they going
to a wolf is going to go to the the the
supermarket and say, "I can only eat a
processed dog. I can't eat a chicken or
a rat or a mouse." I mean, the absurdity
of what we do as a species. It's just
nuts. So, u uh and then it turned out
that the vets and the dog food
industries got in together and they the
dog food industry said we'll support it.
It's it's all revenue generation. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so anyway,
it's all when you put it all down to we
put ourselves in this hole. Um and we
can we can dig ourselves out of it uh by
knowing what to do and how to do it. Um
and it may be uncomfortable for some
people to know that, but I I don't care
anymore, you know. So um yeah but um can
I ask you regarding metabolic therapy?
Are you currently working with or
collaborating with oncologists and
working on clinical applications of
metabolic therapy for cancer patients
today? Yeah that's our big paper that
came out with the protocol treatment
that Dr. Dur he he was at the other
meeting in in Switzerland and and
they're going to start up in clinics.
There there are folks that are going to
start implementing what we have said uh
and the protocols and the treatments.
But why are they not doing it? But
you're not going to get at you only get
it at these new small clinics. You're
not getting it at the top hospitals. Um
no one is doing metabolic therapy at the
top hospitals. Um because it's it's too
disruptive uh the revenue stream. Can
you imagine if MD Anderson or Sloan
Kettering top medical schools would
start doing metabolic therapy and the
outcome of their patients would be
massively better than what they're doing
currently. There'd be they'd be
everybody would want that. Yeah. Right.
But they don't they can't do that. It
it's it's too disruptive to the current
technology. So um but it it'll come
because patients want to live and that's
going to be the pressure. It has to come
from both the scientific side societ
side and the and the treatment side, the
clinical side and the scientific side
both coming together for this common
goal. Uh and entrepreneurs and the you
saw the the guy the insurance guy at the
meeting there saying all we're trying to
Are you kidding me? You think they're
going to start giving these guys
continuous glucose monitors so they can
bring their sugars down? Insurance
policies may have to be rewritten. They
don't want to lose any money either.
They're all part of the same problem.
They're they're they're all everybody's
backs slapping and making a hell of a
lot of money on this cancer stuff, but
nobody really wants to do anything about
it. Um so so but but we certainly can
and uh you can and your your clinics
can, but you got to be careful though.
They they come after you and say, "Oh,
you're practicing medicine the way it's
not supposed to be." And then you got to
run into all these legalistic kinds of
things. So, but you know, I'm not part
of their club. So, uh I I really don't
really worry about that. You guys have
to worry about it more than me. Uh my
job is just prove the science and
somebody please prove me wrong. So, I I
come to asking people, show me where I
made this great mistake. How is it
possible that I was misled by Otto
Warberg, a giant? How did he mislead me?
How did my preclinical studies mislead
me? What experiment that what control
group did I miss that I didn't include?
You know, why are these guys that do
what we say live longer than the ones
who don't do what we say? So, I I I
don't know. Maybe where are we making
this great mistake? I haven't found it
yet. Please, somebody tell me where I
made this mistake. I can't. So, this is
what we're up against uh right now. You
know, what are you working on right now,
Thomas? Are there new studies or
projects that you are especially excited
about or Yeah, we're working big time
right as we're talking right next door
behind me here. We've got big projects
on breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, uh
chronic disease, uh managing chronic
diseases. So, we're we're looking at
mitochondria function. Uh we're doing
all the things preclinally uh that we
need to do and at basic science levels,
interrogating cancer cells. We're trying
to find the cancer cell that can survive
on fatty acids and ketone bodies. We
can't find it. We're banging our heads
against we're so disappointed and
depressed that we can't find a a tumor
cell that can live on fatty acids. So, I
can't find it. So, we just have to keep
doing what we're doing and just
overwhelmed with the evidence and then
eventually will somebody will say,
"Yeah, those guys were right actually."
So, uh and yes, we are right. It it's
just it just takes a time for the
people. It's so disruptive right now,
especially when they hear what I say and
then they go running down to their
physicians. Oh, I just heard the most
incredible thing. Can you give me
metabolic therapy? I know there's no
evidence to support. Never heard of it.
Yeah. And the poor patient gets out and
she's so depressed. I I I've had people
tell me, "I shouldn't say what I'm
saying because I'm giving false hope to
people." And and I'm What do you mean
giving false hope? You go to the
physician, he's telling you need
radiation and chemo. That that's not
that's false hope. You know, most that's
because they don't usually tell patients
this stuff is paleotative. We're giving
you paleotative. You know, a lot of
times they're not saying we can cure
you, we're just giving you what does
that mean? Keeping you alive a little
bit longer in a miserable miserable
state of existence. No, no, no. You you
have to this has to be a transitional
knowledge. You have to become
scientifically literate and aware of
what you're doing. and and this so it's
a it's a it's a it's going to happen in
many fronts not one front and it's a
whole transition of thinking about
medicine and and knowing that it's the
mitochondria nobody ever talked about
that what are you talking about
mitochondri know what a mitochondria is
most people don't even know what the
hell a mitochondria is how what is a
mitochondria can I buy it can I get a
mitochondria on Amazon and I send away
for
right you know Amazon's selling
mitochondria
That's the absurdity of it, right? So,
uh, people have to be scientifically
literate and have to know what how their
bodies work and what makes it healthy
and what doesn't. And we're pointing
that out and giving you quantitative
tools to know that. Oh, that's a
breakthrough. So, um, yeah, I, you know,
we're excited about that and we got a
lot of eight cancers and we're just
going through the list of cancers
showing if we could find any that can't
that can survive without glucose and
glutamine and we can't. So, we know it's
all the same disease and and that word
just has to keep getting out and getting
out and getting out because the
questions you ask me are the questions
everybody asked me. Um, you know, how
many
what are the questions like we've kept
this guy alive for 12 or 14 years and he
should have been dead in 6 months. What
do you think the next step should be to
keep him going?
How do you think we should make an
adjustment? Yeah. Well, those are the
kinds of questions that I'd love to
have. Um, because what do you mean? The
guy should have been dead 8 10 years
ago. What the hell is he doing still
alive? Why is he still alive? What did
you do? And the doctors always say that
when I get all these emails back from
people I I haven't heard from for years
and I thought they were dead and they
come back and I'm still alive. And and
the doctor the doc the doctors say,
"Wow, this is really interesting. Just
keep doing what you're doing. I don't
really not want to know what you did,
but just keep doing what you're doing."
Well, you don't want to know what you
should know exactly why you did and why
you did that. But they don't want to
know. I say, "How could you be so
resistant to knowledge? I I don't know."
Um but but I I laugh because the doctors
are always miffed. Oh, we haven't seen
anything like this before. Oh, this is
really interesting. Well, you'd get this
every time if you did the same thing,
you know. But, uh, I don't know. You
tell me how long it's going to take.
What do you think? What do you think
about all this, Ragna? What's your view?
You're the You're in the system. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, I don't know because I
feel like it's a little bit difficult
talking about this with my colleagues
because of what you said. You know,
you're being monitored. So I kind of
talk with people who are not healthc
care educated like my husband who's a
pilot he's the one who introduces me to
all of these new ideas of thinking for
the past 10 years. So yeah I I I I don't
know I hope it will you know I think
social media podcasts etc will you know
is a great way to kind of speed this a
little bit up. So I I'm hopeful that a
lot of change will happen in my
lifetime. Yeah. Yeah. Well, um JJ Tan,
he's a pilot for Air France. He just
recently retired. I don't know if you
know JJ. Your husband should know who he
is. My husband. He wrote a book. Yeah.
He wrote a book um Flying High on how he
used metabolic therapy. He had terminal
kidney cancer and uh he flew the big
jumbo jets for Air France and he had a
meeting in in the big cancer center in
Paris about metabolic therapy. Um so he
saved himself and he's still doing well.
Um uh came and his story these stories
that he are horrific called Flying High
by JJ Troong uh who had advanced kidney
cancer. He was a a pilot um for Air
France for many many years, but he's
just turned retired, but he was the
first pilot to get his license back
after being diagnosed with terminal
cancer. Oh, yeah. I love him. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. He's a friend of mine. Nice
French guy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, he
used our metabolic therapy. Oh my god.
Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. So, um Oh,
yeah. These guys. So there's a lot of
people out there that are doing that
that can do much better than they are.
I'm telling you, it's a movement. It's
happening. It's a big movement. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, so if you email me
and I'll give you the um the address to
our society. Yeah. For because um uh
Janick Nathan at Mumbai India is our the
secretary. Uh he he he's an MD who's
been working in ketogenic diet therapy
for epilepsy now switching to cancer or
doing both actually. So he's very
skilled and knowledgeable, but he's the
secretary of this society. The problem,
the society doesn't have a very rich
philanthropist to say, okay, you know,
usually the federal government Yeah. or
drug company will come in and say, "Let
me give you all this money to start this
new society to push our drugs or
something." Well, who we're not pushing
anything except metabolic health. Yeah.
So, it's hard to get it's hard to get
the kind of kickoff money you need to
have this kind of thing. So, but any
event um listen I'll let you go. I got
to run. I have a meeting and uh um and I
see my kids are coming home.
But before we before we wrap up, one big
question. Do you believe I think you
know everyone all listeners are thinking
this right now. Do you believe that you
know it's necessary to adhere to a
ketogenic diet throughout your whole
life if you want to avoid getting
serious diseases like cancer or can you
do it as like a management tool? Well,
that's why we're developing this new um
ketogenic uh G GKI strategy that will
allow you to be in different zones. Um
so you don't if you want to get into the
dark green zone to manage a disease or
to get just go get a super healthy for a
while, that's fine. But you can go into
the the yellow zones, the orange zones.
These are different zones of of of
health. Um and how long you want to stay
in a zone uh is up to you. uh but all we
know is the dark red zone where GKI is
above uh 50 is not healthy. Um and but
you'd know that and then you can make
your own decision. So again, you you
have the the choice to go in and out of
these health zones based on the
information you get from the glucose
ketone index, which comes now blood
ketone sticks and glucose sticks or
you're going to have the continuous
glucose ketone monitors that you'll see
on your cell phone. So this will all be
the answer to your question is it's
happening. It's going to come right
down. So you don't have to be it's your
choice as to how many how long you want
to be in these zones. So, um, and then
you'll know because right now there's no
way to know any of this. It's all
speculation and guesswork. Um, but we'll
we'll make that quantitative, more more
more regimented. Yeah. Well, Thomas Eph,
thank you so much for your time. I will
put all your links, the links to your
books, um, everything, all your
information on my on my podcast show
notes and I find you. Yeah, we we and
we're all supported by philanthropy and
private foundations. So, it's the
private foundations and philanthropy
uh that keep us going and uh and and and
more and more folks are starting to
donate money to us. Um because and
there's some people out there that just
want to be part of the movement. They
don't really need to make a a profit.
They just want to say we were helping
this thing along. So we have a societies
and things that give us the money and
that keeps us let let me hire all and do
all this research next door. So I'll
give you those links as well. I don't
know if you have you might have them. I
might have them. I I'll we'll I'll send
you an email if I don't. Okay. And I'll
send you the link to our uh Janick
Nathan. Get a hold of Janick. He'll be
happy to talk to you more. Thank you.
That's awesome. Okay. All right. Very
nice speaking with you. Have a nice day
now. Bye. You too, Thomas. Bye-bye.
Thanks for tuning in to this episode. If
you're looking for more information or
want to check out any studies or
reference, head on to my website, baby
let'sove.com. You can also join me for a
workout through my app called baby let's
move available in both App Store and
Google Play. And don't forget to connect
with me on Instagram and YouTube for
even more content. If you enjoyed
today's show, please consider giving it
a fivestar rating or a like and share it
with a friend. It really helps me reach
more amazing listeners like you. Until
next time, keep moving and stay healthy.
[Music]